Rumi the 13th century Persian poet who was born on the land that is now
Afghanistan.
Is there something in his words that speaks to you about the spirit of the
Afghan people?
I mean, everyone owns Rumi, I guess I'd say,
I mean that that's gonna get me in trouble with certain Afghan fans of Rumi who
wanna see him as, as Afghan, I would say. Are.
They proud of, of RO? Yeah. Do they see him as a.
Afghan? Do they? Yeah. I mean, some it, again, it depends. I mean, some,
some people will be militant and say, you know,
the audience can have him he's ours. Um, but they're also say, you know, he's,
I mean, you can say again, he's like a RO shock blo. I mean, he's, he's a Sufi,
he's a Muslim, he's a central Asian mm-hmm, <affirmative>, he's Iranian,
he's AF he's a Turk. I'm trying to think of the analogy, but he's,
he's something special to everyone. So I guess I would,
I would not walk into that conversation and claim that he's one or another, but,
but it's a cool thing. I mean, it's the, um,
but I'm glad you brought that up cause that's a good way of seeing a seeing.
So the Afghans, I mean, we live in our to AF Afghanistan say, okay,
Rus everyone, you know, Madonna helped make a famous in the United States,
you know, for better,
for worse mm-hmm <affirmative> they used to sell stuff at Starbucks and that's
all complicated. Um, and embarrassing and his,
his translations are very much disputed where you have people be like,
there's some awful roomy translations. And there are,
there're also a lot of speaking of the internet, there are lots of, uh,
fake roomy quotes. Yes. You know, like roomy said always be your best.
Didn't say that, that, you know, that was, you know, I mean,
that's kinda slow stuff like that, but yeah, but the cool thing is like the, um,
I mean, I think you can read Rumi as a religious thinker, but you can also,
you know, read Rumi as a, um, you know, and in this Islamic sense,
but you can also read 'em as a kind of spiritualist, right. As someone who, or,
or an ethicist or moralist. And so I think that's, I like the,
the lens of roomi as a, a gateway to Afghan, um, AISM and cosmopolitanism,
you know, the, I keep izing of, of meeting actual Afghans who are actually,
you know, fluent and Russian fluent and German, fluent Turkish, they know Dari,
they know Poto, um, they've gone to university or sometimes they haven't.
And yet, I mean, they're, um, I like the category of the, uh,
popular intellectual, you know, the intellectual who isn't,
isn't formally educated necessarily. Although of course that's represented too,
especially increasingly now with this and of going to university all over the
world, you know, Stanford, MIT, everywhere. Um, Africans are war reps are there,
but just being,
I don't have any kind of worldly knowledge that is not limited to a province to
a village, to a Hamlet, but sometimes it is, but sometimes it's not because of,
again, not because of some fairytale story of curiosity,
wanting the globe out of, you know, some sense of, of privilege,
but out of necessity, outta survival of, of having to adapt. And it's really,
um, extraordinary that, I mean, also you think about like professions, like,
you know, ask, ask Afghan, you know,
what does he or she do for a living and what have they done in the past? I mean,
the answer is one gets shoe salesman, task up drivers, uh,
surgeons all in one guy.
Yeah. Yeah. I.
Mean that, I mean, that's not just AFG in, but that's, you know,
that that's very common, but.
It's also, Russia is the same that's right.
I think it's whenever there's complexities to the economic system and then
that's right.
A short term and the long term history of how the country develops and is
basically the people figuring out their way around a mess of a country
politically. Yeah. But a, uh,
beautiful flourishing culture and a humanity. Yeah. And that,
that creates super interesting people. Yeah. Yeah. So we can often see, okay,
there's Taliban, there's war, there's, uh, economic malfunction.
There's harboring of terrorists, there's opium trade, all that kind of stuff.
But there's humans there with deep into intellectual lies. Uh,
and, uh, like I love the movie love crimes and the same kind of, uh,
hopes, fears, and desire to love the, the old Romeo and Juliet story.
And I think roomy to me represents that
the wit the intelligence,
but also the just eloquent and just beautiful
representation of humanity, of love. Some of the,
some of the best quotes about love from him, half of them fake, right.
<laugh> half them real, but the best ones are real. Right.
The best ones are real. Yeah. The best ones are real. Uh, Robert,
this was an incredible conversation. Oh, thank you for having it.
Thank you for the tour of Afghanistan
and making me, making us realize that, um,
there's much more to this country than, um,
what we may think it's a,
it's a beautiful country and it's full of beautiful people.
You made me think about a lot of new things too. So it was definitely,
definitely great for all my end too. So thank you so much.